>> Is the universe
connected at all scales?
And if so, how do
we experience it?
In this episode, we
discover that whatever we do
influences the whole.
[THEME MUSIC PLAYING]
>> In the earlier episodes, we
have discussed that space time
is not empty, that it's full
of these fluctuation of Planck
oscillators.
And these Planck
oscillators can be
thought that as little
bits of information,
that this Planck field--
this granular
Planck field that's
occurring at the very fine
structure of spacetime
spins itself into protons,
atoms, planets, stars,
galaxies, clusters, super
clusters, universes,
each one being centered
by singularity,
by a little teeny black hole,
and that is producing scales
across our universe
from universal size
to subatomic part and that
the holographic nature
of the interference pattern of
these little Plancks creating
all these wave form produce a
holographic solution in which
every point contains the whole.
There is discoveries
that are occurring now
in physics in which we
are starting to understand
something that's been very
puzzling for many years
in quantum theory.
Einstein called it spooky
action at a distance.
>> Einstein's spooky action
at a distance theory refers
to quantum entanglement, which
states that the measurement
of one particle will instantly
influence another particle
regardless of how
far apart they are.
So when you modify one
particle, the other one
modifies itself
almost instantaneously
across vast distances.
>> This was a consequence of the
exploration of quantum theory
early on, and Einstein thought
it was crazy and spooky.
And then eventually, it was
confirmed in laboratory.
In laboratory, we discovered
that this is true.
You can shoot a laser at a
carbon particle, for instance,
and it will emit photons.
And if the photons are
emitted away from each other,
they will travel through
a very specific vector,
and at a certain
distance, you can
put a polarizer on one
side and then a detector
behind the polarizer
on both sides.
And so that the
polarizer will change
the angle of the one for
time on one side and then
the detector will pick up the
new orientation of that photon.
And we discovered that
it doesn't matter how
far the distance the proton--
the photons travel before
they get modified--
before the one get modify.
The other one will be modified
instantaneously as well.
Because we've put the polarizer
close enough to the detector
that even at the speed
of light, the information
could not be transferred
to the other one.
Yet the other one arrives
at the detector with exactly
the same polarization.
This is called
entanglement in physics.
Particles can be entangled.
They have to be in a certain
state to be entangled.
And so we think that
there is particles
in the universe that are
entangled and particles
in the universe that are not.
Is that true?
How do we know that's true?
In fact, we don't.
In fact, we could
think that we could
have a universe in
which all particles are
entangled because they all
came out of the same point
just like the two photons
came out of the same carbon
particle.
And so that all particles that
came out of the early universe
are entangled.
And we don't know because when
we wiggle the little particle
on the end of my finger here,
we don't know-- maybe there's
another particle somewhere
else in the universe that's
feeling that tickle.
And it's laughing,
but we don't know
because we don't have that
side in our laboratory
to realize that when
I tickle this one,
it's entangled with this one.
The whole thing
could be entangled.
This appeared to me early on
in my exploration of physics.
And it became clear that maybe
some of the entanglement that's
occurring at the quantum level
is the same dynamics that
is going on in black hole.
>> Entanglement at the quantum
level may be the result
of wormholes that are developed
in the structure of space,
connecting particles together.
However, wormholes are a
consequence of Einstein field
equations, not of
quantum theory.
These would be
quantum size wormholes
that are at the Planck scale
of the structure of space time.
This new understanding was
developed by Leonard Susskind
and is described
as ER equals EPR.
E stands for Einstein.
R and P are initials for
collaborators Boris Podolsky
and Nathan Rosen.
So ER equals EPR suggests that
the key to their connection
can be found in the spacetime
tunnels known as wormholes
like subspace
shortcuts physically
linking distant locations.
So ER equals EPR
is a way of saying
wormholes is what
produce entanglement
at the quantum level.
>> This new view is emerging
as well from our equations now
where basically we're showing
that we have embeddedness
of wormholes and black
holes from universal size
to subatomic size.
So think of the
black holes as being
the boundary that's created
by all the Plancks spinning
into one region, and the
wormholes, the vortices that
would be produced by
the spin as it goes--
as it extends from the
black hole structure.
ER equals EPR is basically
thinking of it a little bit
differently but is
as well very useful.
And it returns, and it has to do
with this holographic solution
in the standard model
that says that the entropy
or the temperature
of the black hole
is the result of all the
little Planck information
on the surface of
the black hole.
When this hawking
radiation happened
when the black hole absorbed
one little Planck particle
fluctuation of the
vacuum and emits one,
these particles despair
of Planck particles
are entangled just
like the two photons
that emerge from the carbon
particle in our experiment.
And so imagine this.
One is falling into
the black hole,
and the other one
is entangled with it
but going away from
the black hole.
And then imagine
that particle gets
caught in the gravitational
field of another black hole.
And now it spirals in and falls
into the other black hole.
Now these two black
holes are connected
through this wormhole
that connected
the entanglement of
these two particles,
a little teeny
Planck sized wormhole
except there could be
many, many of the particles
that fell into the
black hole and many,
many that fell in
other black holes
and so on and then
go back in time.
And think of all
this stuff coming out
of one black hole, one point.
And then you will see,
you will visualize,
you will understand that
all of these wormholes
would be like a spider
web of information network
emanating and connecting
all of the black holes,
all of the singularity, all of
the particles in our universe.
So we live in a web of
information exchange,
and this is really--
what our equations are
showing is that when
the information is exchanged
between the interior
of the singularity, the
interior of the black hole,
no matter at what scale,
its exchange with the hole
as well through the
wormhole network.
And when the exchange
happens between one particle
and the whole, the
energy that it produce
is what we call mass.
And that is what we
call our reality.
This network of
information has been imaged
and is being discovered now.
Recently, we have
seen that when we
look at very large
structures in the universe,
they appear to be connected
through these filaments that
connects very large like
super clusters and cluster
structures in our universe.
And when we look at that
from far as a whole,
it looks very similar to a
neuron network in your brain.
This is all very
interesting evidence
of scaling of this network
across very large and very
small.
Imagine the network structure
of all the wormholes
occurring at the Planck
scale and then these network,
making larger network at the
proton scale and then these
making larger network at
the solar system scale
and at the galactic
scale and so on so
that everything is connected to
this invisible Planck structure
network of information,
moving bits of information
across the universe so that when
one bit falls into a black hole
here, it can come out
somewhere else in the universe.
If this is true,
then the concept
of evaporation of
black holes disappear.
We are now no longer
losing energy.
The energy is always
recovered in the universe
as it exchange information
across all nodes.
>> Imagine the internet as
an analogy for the structure
of our universe where the hubs
of the internet and the servers
of the network are the black
holes and all the different
scales, and the connection of
the networks are the wormholes
connecting all the hubs.
Think of it as a neural
network of the universe.
>> Everything we observe in the
universe in terms of the energy
of a system, in terms of the
relationship of systems with
each other like the forces and
all this is actually the result
of the information moving
through the network.
If I isolate one particle
because it doesn't
have much surface, not
as much information
can move through the system.
The mass of that
particle will be
smaller than the black
hole in the universe
like the center of a galaxy
in which a lot of information
can be exchanged
across that hub.
Smaller hub, smaller server,
less energy, larger server,
larger hub, more
energy, and as we know,
energy is equivalent to mass.
So all of a sudden, we start
to see this network structure
emerging that is
from the universe
all the way to
subatomic particle
in which we are embedded
in somewhere in the middle.
And our existence is
actually part of this flow.
So this network connects
all these scales.
That means that a
bit of information
that falls into one
part of the network
can come out somewhere
else in the network
and then fall in again and
come out somewhere else.
And so that means
that information
would have some large
feedback relationship,
and we are starting
to discover that.
We are starting to discover
that light in our universe
curves back on itself
and comes back on itself.
We-- and this is
very, very recent,
so it's very exciting
because I predicted
that that should be
the case, especially
if we're living inside a black
hole that is our universe.
So this information
network feedback
feed forward structure is
the entropy of our network.
That is-- and this
happened just recently.
I got very excited about it.
We were writing equations
in my laboratory.
We ran out of
space on our board,
so we started writing
on the windows.
And we were writing all of
these equations on the windows,
and it became clear
that we could express
the holographic mass solution
which I had expressed
in a very geometric
way from the theory
of entropy or
statistical entropy
or straight from first
principle of thermodynamics.
And what I mean by that is
that we can actually back up
the equations that are
more geometric equations,
the holographic math solution
I proposed initially,
into equations that describe
the temperature of systems
and their entropy,
their energy level.
Think of it as each
server on the network
is riding the information onto
our hard drive and the energy
that it takes for it to do
that and the temperature that's
created by the server
that usually has fans
to take the temperature out.
It means that this
whole structure
can be expressed fundamentally
from first principle
from thermodynamics and entropy,
that energy thermodynamics
entropy, mass, gravity,
electromagnetism, and all
these things can be actually
described from this one
understanding, this one
set of information network
that connects everything
in the universe
so that nothing is
independently doing its thing.
It just appears that way
because we observe something
and we think it's independent
from the rest of the universe,
and we say it has this mass.
It has this energy.
It has this entropy.
It has this
temperature, not knowing
that this mass, this entropy,
this temperature, and all
this stuff is the result
of this thing interacting
with the rest of their universe.
That is beautiful.
This is what the
equations are showing,
and it is extremely precise.
It's showing this in a
very, very strong way,
telling us at the very
fundamental level of creation
that everything is connected
through this incredible network
of information
that is circulating
through our universe.
That has deep
implications because it
means that anything
you do it means
that anything that changes
anywhere is influencing
everything else in the universe,
that every action produces
a reaction everywhere
in the universe.
And although-- however,
it's important to understand
that they're a
scale relationship.
So there is hierarchy in the
influence of DNA formation
in the universe.
There is influences that
are larger, for instance,
our sun has a huge influence
on the solar system
and all the planets in it.
But our planets only makes less
than 1% the mass of our sun,
so they have much less
influence on our sun
than our sun has
influence on the planets.
If the sun blows a sun flare
in the direction of the Earth
and blows the atmosphere
of the Earth away,
the Earth doesn't
really have a recourse.
It cannot blow back at the
sun and blow the atmosphere
of the sun away.
There is a relationship of
temperatures, energy, mass,
entropy across the
different scales.
However, every single
scale is influencing
every single other scale as
well, maybe in a minimum way
or in the maximum way, but
the whole is connected.
And so everything that
happens in the universe
is in some ways recorded
by the structure
of the network of spacetime.
And that is profound.
It tells us that from
any point in the network,
we can have access to the whole.
And it tells us that everything
we measure in our world
is actually a function
of that thing interacting
with everything else.
There is huge
implication in terms
of technology and understanding
of energy and temperature,
thermodynamics, and
so on, but there's
implication as well
in understanding
the possibility of systems
self-organizing, systems
becoming aware, awareness,
consciousness, all
this can most likely
be extrapolated
from this new view.
And we will discuss this
in further episodes.
What's important to
extract from this episode
is that the universe is
connected at the deepest level
through wormholes
black hole interaction
and that it's connected
at all scale, not just
linear connection at one
scale but at all scales
and that we're part of
this connected universe
and that whatever happens
in the universe, whatever
we do influence the whole.
And that changes our sense of
ourselves, of our universe,
and our relationship
to it, and it
changes ourselves-- our sense of
responsibility in the universe.
As well, it connects with some
of the most advanced knowledge
that has come through
the ages from masters
and ancient civilization that
talked about our universe being
completely connected and talked
about each point influencing
the whole.